# **2015-01-07:** First Faust Open Source Software Competition

GRAME is happy to announce the first Faust Open Source Software Competition !

## Overview

Faust Open-Source Software Competition is intended to promote innovative high-quality free audio software developed with the Faust programming language. The Faust Open-Source Software award will be attributed to the best submission by an international committee of leading experts in the field. The competition is sponsored by Grame, centre national de création musicale. The winning software will receive a **2000€** price to encourage its authors. The results will be announced during the **Linux Audio Conference 2015** in Mainz.

To participate, the software must be provided with source code and licensed with a Free/Open Source license. A substantial part of the software must be written in Faust and the Faust source code must be provided. As part of the review process, the software will be built from the sources. All source code, license, video demonstration, installation instructions, and any other documentation must be available on a public web page. License compatibility with other open source software is encouraged. Dependencies on non-open source third-party software are discouraged, with the exception of operating systems and freely available commercial packages.

Authors are encouraged to prepare a video demonstrating the software as well as any useful documentation, including examples of how the provided software might be used, existing prototypes that use the software, download statistics or other public usage information. The criteria for judging submissions includes broad applicability and potential impact, novelty, technical depth, reusability, etc.

## Important dates
 
- Software Submission Deadline: March 15, 2015
- Results of the competition : April 10, 2015 (during the Linux Audio Conference 2015 in Mainz)

## Submission Guidelines

Authors interested in participating to the Faust Open Source Software Competition should send a submission email to faustaward@grame.fr with a PDF file attached containing the following information:

## Title of submission

- Name, email and affiliation of the main author
- Names, emails and affiliations of other authors
- A permanent link for the open source software (e.g., Sourceforge, GitHub, Google Code, etc.).
- A permanent link for the video demonstration (e.g., Youtube, Vimeo, etc.).
- A link to a compressed archive file that contains the software (source code, documentation, build/install instructions, and licenses. Comprehensive and clear build/install instructions will be a crucial component of any submission. The committee will make reasonable effort to build the software for the top contributions, but if they are unable to make the software run, it will be excluded from the competition).

---
